# **LAMMPS**

(Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator)



Used for Molecular Dynamics  simulations (but also possible to use for the energy minimization and Monte Carlo Simulations)



Can model upto few atoms to billions of particles



Free and open source (C++) - By Sandia National Laboratory





### **Conventions of LAMMPS**



1. Size and Geometry of the Simulation box -

 

 	Space where the atoms can move

 

 	Can be cubic, monoclinic, ... (mostly used cubic)

 

 	Cubic Box lx = ly = lz = a = edge of the box

 	and xy = xz = yz = 0

 

 	xlo = 0, xhi = lx = a

 	ylo = 0, yhi = ly = a

 	zlo = 0, zhi = lz = a





2\. Coordinate System -



 	Position the atoms by giving cartesian Coordinate (x,y,z)





3\. Periodic Boundary Conditions -



 	p: periodic, s: non-periodic



 	Non periodic - If an atom hit the boundary, would it be lost or bounce back or the simulation box increase to contain the atom like conditions



 	Periodic - considering that the simulation box we consider is surrounded by SIMILIARLY ACTING AND ATOM CONTAINING simulation boxes. So if an atom in the simulation box we consider move to the right, a similar like atom will com back from left side into the simulation box we are working on.



(Periodic Effect are used to mimic the infinite, bulk system and to eliminate surface effects)



In periodic conditions, you must consider the distance between two atoms, as the smallest distance possible between those two. For example if two atoms are present in the same line but one closer to left boundary and other close to the right boundary, the one near to the right boundary has a closer atom to its right on the periodic simulation box on right and same for the left atom. Smallest distance has the more interaction between the two atoms.





4\. Thermodynamic Ensemble

What are the thermodynamical conditional to be fixed and what to be free to change?



NVE - Microcanonical ensemble (Fix Number of atoms, Volume, Total Energy )

NVT - canonical ensemble (Fix Number of atoms, Volume, Temperature)

NPT - isobaric ensemble (Fix Number of Atoms, Pressure, Temperature)



...or sth else





Example - You cannot fix the volume and Pressure at the same time. Because one varies the other.

Fix also the Energy OR the Temperature

Fix number of atoms OR the chemical potential



Extensive properties - Number of atoms, Volume, Energy

Intensive Property - Chemical Potential, Pressure, Temperature.

For each extensive property there is an corresponding intensive property.



 	eg -

 	extensive property - volume

 	in a system v1, v2 gives v1 + v2 = total V



 	but for an intensive property - Pressure,

 	in a system p1, p2 means p1 = p2 = total P (at equilibrium)









5\. Units (use a system of units)

 	eg - real (mostly used), metal, si, ...







### **Input files**



Each new simulation must be running in a NEW DIRECTORY.







 	Each directory should contain the respective input file	with parameters to use and type of simulation to run.



Will generate an output files containing the outcomes of the simulation.



 	eg - initial position of atoms, number of atoms, temperature, etc.

 





Typical Input File -

 

 	1. structure.dat - data file -

 		size of system, number of atoms, number of atom types, mass of each type, position of each atom ( and their potential velocity)



 	2. in.filename - input file -

 		contains the instructions of the tasks to perform, the parameters ( and potentially the force-field, or empirical potential). Can also contain the position of each atoms (when it acan be calculated analytically)



 	3. pot.mod - potential file (if needed)

 		contains the info about the potential to use





#### Typical Data file



(not generated by hand , maybe a result of another simulation or write a script to generate the random atom positions)





\# SiO2.dat (this is a comment)



\# initial configuration of a silica glass



3000 atoms 	# number of atoms

2 atom types	# type 1 - Si, type 2 - O



\# size of Simulation box (geometry)



0.0 35.1 xlo xhi # real units ( angstroms )

0.0 35.1 ylo yhi

0.0 35.1 zlo zhi



Masses



1 28.0855 # Si - molar mass (real units - g per mole)

2 15.9994 # O - molar mass



Atoms # position of atoms



\# id (1 - 3000), type (1 or 2 for Si, O), charge (2.4 Si, -1.2 O), position x y z



1 1 2.4 3.81234341341341e+00 7.2342623423434234e+00 3.23524234314134314e+00

2 1 2.4 3.81234341341341e+00 7.2342623423434234e+00 3.23524234314134314e+00

3 2 -1.2 3.81234341341341e+00 7.2342623423434234e+00 3.23524234314134314e+00

4 2 -1.2 3.81234341341341e+00 7.2342623423434234e+00 3.23524234314134314e+00

5 2 -1.2 3.81234341341341e+00 7.2342623423434234e+00 3.23524234314134314e+00

6 1 2.4 3.81234341341341e+00 7.2342623423434234e+00 3.23524234314134314e+00

...







#### Typical input File (in.glass)





\# input file to generate a silica glass

units		real

dimensions 	3		# 3d system

processors	\* \* \*		# how LAMMPS should allocate to different processors - let LAMMPS define it

boundary 	p p p 		# periodic or non periodic (s) - x y z



\# read data

atom\_style	charge		# different atoms with a different charge

read\_data	SiO2.dat	# configuration from data file



\# potential

include	 	pot.mod		# potentials



\# outputs

thermo 		100		# output thermodynamical properties very '100' steps

thermo\_style	custom step temp pe press vol lx density

\# stepwise - temp at first step, temp at second sep and so on, (and ones below)

\# pe - potential energy

\# press - pressure

\# vol - volume

\# lx - length of simulation box on x-axis

\# density



dump		2 all custom 1000 md.lammpstrj id type x y z

\# will generate a file named md.lammpstrj with details of each atom id, type, and the position every '1000' steps of 'all' atoms





\# initial minimisation

minimize	1.0e-10 1.0e-10 100000 100000

\# telling LAMMPS to do an energy minimization

\# because starting from a random position of atoms (always good to do this first)







#### What is Energy Minimization?

As atoms are present in a random configuration, the atoms would not be having a distance between each other to minimize it.



By this, **moving the atoms** to minimize the energy of the system.

Done by plotting the energy vs. position for each atom.

@at minimum energy position an atom would increase energy after a slight movement of that atom.





...(in.glass continues)



\# initial mixing

fix		1 all nvt temp 5000 5000 100

run 		200000

unfix 		1

\# fix number of atoms, volume and temp (n, v predefined in input files)

\# temp - start from '5000' (initial temp) and next '5000' (final temp)

\# dumping factor (100) - how often (steps) the lammps should adjust the temp

\# temperature is adjusted by considering the velocity of atoms, if high velocity, that implements high temp and will decrease the overall velocity of the atoms and vice versa.

\# for volume typically good dumping factor is 100 times the timestep



fix 		1 all npt temp 5000 5000 100 iso 0 0 1000

run 		100000

unfix 		1

\# keep number of atoms, pressure, temperature constant and adjust the volume

\# 'iso' means isostatic pressure ie same pressure on all sides. then initial and final pressure values.

\# '1000' is the dumping factor and how often (steps) to check and adjust the volume.

\# To adjust volume, pressure would be updated by LAMMPS and decrease volume to release tension and go to 0 pressure.

\# for pressure typically good dumping factor is 1000 times the timestep

\# run command tells the how many steps need to be done under the given conditions. (each step is 1 femtoseconds)

\# unfix and name of the fix command ( first character or number entered under fix command ). After this constraints mentioned in the fix command are not valid.





\# cooling at 1 K/ps

fix 		1 all npt temp 5000 300 100 iso 0 0 1000

run 		4700000

unfix 		1

\# cooling rate = delta\_Theta / delta\_T = (5000-300)K/4700ps = 1K/ps



\# final relaxation

fix 		1 all npt temp 300 300 100 iso 0 0 1000

run 		100000

unfix 		1



\# write and save final configuration

write\_data	S300K.dat		# save final positions of atoms

write\_restart	S300K.rest		# restart file later contains more details about the system (potentials, ...)





Typical Potential File (pot.mod)





\# include types of potentials and types of interatomic energy, other parameters for potential



\# BKS potential

pair\_style	buck/coul/long 5.5 10.0 		# combining Buckingham, coulombic and

\# 5.5 cutoff for Buckingham potential and for pairs of bonds with greater distances between 5.5 angstroms, Buckingham potential term is considered as 0

\# 10.0 is the cutoff for the coulombic potential

pair\_coeff	1 1 0.0 1.0 0.0				# Si-Si

pair\_coeff	1 2 414612.50 0.20520 3075.278		# Si-O

pair\_coeff	1 2 31982.360 0.36231 4030.1136		# O-O

\# pair coeff gives the potential coefficients.

\# 1 and 2 are the atom numbers

\# A - pre exponential parameter in the equation of the coulombic and buckingham form

\# ro - parameter in equation

\# C - parameter in equation







\# MD Parameters

kspace\_style 	ewald 1.0e-5			# how to calculate long range coulombic interactions - this line should not changed

neighbor	2.0 bin				#

neigh\_modify	every 1 check yes		#

timestep 	1.0				# must be small enough so that numerical integrations are correct

\# duration of each MD steps













#### Output Files



1. Final-structure.dat - data file

 	Identical to input data file. Contain final configuration, position and velocities of atoms at the end of the simulations.

 	Can be used as an input file for a new simulation



2\. md.lammpstrj - trajectory file

 	position of atoms every N steps ( for visualizations and calculate atoms specific properties)



3\. log.lammps - log file

 	every info about what is done

 	look when sth goes wrong and understand what went wrong



4\. out.filename - output.file

 	contains a summary of the action executed

 	potential error messages

 	thermodynamics data







\# Typical trajectory file (md.lammpstrj)

ITEM: TIMESTEP # for first step of simulation

0

ITEM: NUMBER OF ATOMS

3000

ITEM: BOX BOUNDS pp pp pp

0 35.1 		# xl xhi

0 35.1		# ylo yhi

0 35.1		# zlo zhi

ITEM: ATOMS id type x y z

135 2 6.15145 5.28615 2.68451		# there will be 3000 lines as such to represent all atoms

...



\# at each timestep this block would be regenerated and stored in trajectory file









\# Typical output file (out.glass)

\# version number

\# actions done

\# thermodynamical properties

\# steps of energy minimization











### Running LAMMPS

terminal on MacOS/ Linux

cmd prompt on Windows



Go to simulation directory

\# run LAMMPS

lammps <in.filename > out.filename				(MaxOS/Linux)

lmp\_win\_no-mpi -in in.filename -out out.filename		(windows)









On Hoffman2 (Clusters)

 

 > Go to simulation directory

 

 > Create your submission file:

&nbsp;	use the command "lammps.q"

&nbsp;	type "B" for Build

&nbsp;	type the name of the input name "in.filename"

&nbsp;	choose the memory allocated "2048" ( in MB )

&nbsp;	Choose the time limit in hours ( less than "24" )

&nbsp;	Type "n" to avoid using resource groups cores ( use private processors if more than 24 hours required )

&nbsp;	Choose how many cores allocated ( "16" or "8" )

&nbsp;	Submit by typing "y"

&nbsp;	Quit by typing "Q"



&nbsp;> Follow your jobs using "myjobs"

&nbsp;> Delete a job using "qdel ID\_of\_the\_job\_to\_delete"



























